
Picture a malicious actor trying to withhold some data from the rest of the network, for example if they’re a mischievous sequencer who did some bad things on an optimistic rollup, and they don’t want anyone to have the data necessary to contest it with a fraud proof. The maximum amount of data they can afford to broadcast to the whole network is just under 50% of the extended data, since anything above that is enough to reconstruct the data and snitch.

Recall that the whole data has been converted into a polynomial, and then extended with as many extra evaluations as there were original points. In our simple example above, we had 4 data points converted into a polynomial of degree 3, then evaluated at 4 more points. Imagine that instead we have 100,000 data points, interpolated into a much bigger polynomial which was then extended with 100,000 more evaluations.

If I’m the malicious actor trying to withhold data, I’m not gonna want to publish more than 99,999 data points from the big list of 200,000 points, since anything more than that is enough to interpolate the same polynomial in order to reconstruct everything. Now your job as a node is to check that at least 50% of the data is available, but without doing the simple thing of downloading everything. How? By turning the whole thing into a probability game, of course!

You pick a number ii between 1 and 200,000 and ask the network for the evaluation of P(i)P(i). The probability that the ii you picked happens to be one of the evaluations I did publish is _at most_ 99,999200,000≈1299,999200,000≈12. You then repeat the process again. The probability that both succeeded is at most 1414. You do it again. And again. After just 30 random checks, the probability that all of them just happened to be one of the minority data points I published is necessarily less than 1230≈11,000,000,0001230≈11,000,000,000. As you can see, it doesn’t take very long for me to fail this little game, since there’s no way I could have predicted ahead of time which random numbers you were going to ask for.

